Update microarray PCA example notebook (#198)
AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples: 02-microarray/dimension-reduction_microarray_01_pca.Rmd

))

# Read in data TSV file
df <- readr::read_tsv(file.path(
  data_dir, # Replace with path to your data file
  "GSE37382.tsv" # Replace with the name of your data file
)) %>%
  # Tuck away the Gene id column as rownames
  tibble::column_to_rownames("Gene")
```

Let's ensure that the metadata and data are in the same sample order. 

```{r}
# Make the data in the order of the metadata
df <- df %>%
  dplyr::select(metadata$geo_accession)

# Check if this is in the same order
all.equal(colnames(df), metadata$geo_accession)
```

Now we are going to use a combination of functions from base R and the `ggplot2` package to perform and visualize the results of the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) dimension reduction technique on our medulloblastoma samples.

## Perform Principal Components Analysis

In this code chunk, we are going to perform Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on our data and create a data frame using the PCA scores and the variables from our metadata that we are going to use to annotate our plot later.
We are using the base R `prcomp()` function to perform Principal Component Analysis (PCA) here [@prcomp-function].

```{r}
# Perform Principal Component Analysis (PCA)

> pca <- prcomp(t(df), # We have to transpose our data frame to meet the `prcomp()` function requirements

Reviewer: I'm wondering if we should put the transpose on its own step. If we do this here, we should also do this `umap()`. I feel 50:50 about it.

Author: What do you think of having it on its own line like in the last commit?

```
prcomp(
t(df), # We have to transpose our data frame to meet the `prcomp()` function requirements
scale = TRUE # This tells R that we want the variables scaled to have unit variance
)
```

Reviewer: I like that as a compromise! Let's do that!

  scale = TRUE # This tells R that we want the variables scaled to have unit variance
)

# Make the first 10 principal components into a data frame for plotting with `ggplot2`

> pca_df <- data.frame(pca$x[, 1:10]) %>%

Reviewer: I think this line probably has too much going on for a beginner to follow. I think we should probably have a quick chunk where we preview what's in `pca$x` so this makes a bit more sense when we get here.

Reviewer: It looks. like we only ever use the first two PCs, should we only bring those into `pca_df`?

  # Turn samples_ids stored as rownames into column
  tibble::rownames_to_column("refinebio_accession_code") %>%
  # Bring only the variables that we want from the metadata into this data frame -- here we are going to join by `refinebio_accession_code` values
  dplyr::inner_join(dplyr::select(
    metadata, refinebio_accession_code,

>     histology, subgroup

Reviewer: Can these all fit in the same line?

  ),
  by = "refinebio_accession_code"
  )
```

> Before visualizing and interpreting the results, it can be useful to understand the proportion of variance explained by each principal component.

Reviewer: This seems like it's a separate topic than `## Perform Principal Components Analysis` so I would say it should have its own header for navigation purposes.

> For example, if PC1 explained 96% of the variance in your data and very clearly showed a difference between sample batches you would be very concerned about your dataset!

Reviewer: Some people may not know that the components are automatically ordered by the variance they explain, aka `PC1` may not mean anything to them at this point, so you may want to rephrase this or lead with that information.

Reviewer: But I do like this lead in, in general :+1:

> On the other hand, if a separation of batches was apparent in a different principal component that explained a low proportion of variance and the first few PCs explained most of the variance and appeared to correspond to something like tissue type and treatment, you would be less concerned [@CCDL2020-cluster-validation].

Reviewer: This citation isn't rendering, I think it needs to be added to `references.bib`.

The `summary()` function reports the proportion of variance explained by each principal component.

> By accessing the `importance` element, which contains the proportion of variance explained by each principal component, with `<summary results>$importance`, we can use indexing to only look at the first `n` PCs.

Reviewer: i would put this sentence after you've completed the `summary()` step and then you can just reference the name of the object in this instance. 
```suggestion
By accessing the `importance` element, which contains the proportion of variance explained by each principal component, with `pca_summary$importance`, we can use indexing to only look at the first `n` PCs.
```

```{r}
# Save the summary of the PCA results using the `summary()` function

> pca_summary <- summary(pca)

Reviewer: My comment above also involves making this step its own chunk.

# Now access and store the importance information for the first 10 PCs

> pca_importance <- pca_summary$importance[, 1:10]

Reviewer: If we are only making this object to print it out, I would say we don't need to bother saving it to an object name, we can just print it out
```suggestion
pca_summary$importance[, 1:10]
```

# Let's take a look at the importance information
pca_importance
```

> Now that we've seen the proportion of variance for the first ten PCs, let's plot the PC scores for the first two principal components, the components responsible for the most explained proportion of variance in our dataset. 

Reviewer: I would put this kind of explanation: `the components responsible for the most explained proportion of variance in our dataset` earlier.

Reviewer: But that leaving the reminder here is also good.

> Let's also label the data points based on their genotype subgroup since this is central to the subgroup specific based hypothesis in the [original paper](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3683624/#SD1) [@Northcott2012].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's also label the data points based on their genotype subgroup.
```
I don't know if we need to use the original paper as a rationale for what we are doing now, but I am for giving a rationale for why we use `subgroup`.

```{r}
# Make a scatterplot using `ggplot2` functionality
pca_plot <- ggplot(
  pca_df,
  aes(
    x = PC1,
    y = PC2,
    color = subgroup # This will label points with different colors for each `subgroup`
  )
) +
  geom_point() + # This tells R that we want a scatterplot
  theme_classic() # This tells R to return a classic-looking plot with no gridlines

# Print out plot here
pca_plot
```

> 

Reviewer: Can we add a sentence after each plot about what we are seeing? Just a quick blurb about interpretation? aka something like `Looks like Group 4 and SHH groups somewhat cluster with each other but____`

This chunk of code will read the both TSV files and add them as data frames to your environment.

```{r}
# Read in metadata TSV file
metadata <- readr::read_tsv(file.path(
  data_dir, # Replace with path to your metadata file
  "metadata_GSE37382.tsv" # Replace with the name of your metadata file
))

# Read in data TSV file
df <- readr::read_tsv(file.path(
  data_dir, # Replace with path to your data file
  "GSE37382.tsv" # Replace with the name of your data file
)) %>%
  # Tuck away the Gene id column as rownames
  tibble::column_to_rownames("Gene")
```

Let's ensure that the metadata and data are in the same sample order. 

```{r}
# Make the data in the order of the metadata
df <- df %>%
  dplyr::select(metadata$geo_accession)

# Check if this is in the same order
all.equal(colnames(df), metadata$geo_accession)
```

<!--ALL THE ANALYSIS STEPS HERE -->

Now we are going to use a combination of functions from base R and the `ggplot2` package to perform and visualize the results of the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) dimension reduction technique on our medulloblastoma samples.

## Perform Principal Components Analysis

> In this code chunk, we are going to perform Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on our data and create a data frame using the 

Author: ```suggestion
In this code chunk, we are going to perform Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on our data and create a data frame using the PCA scores and the variables from our metadata that we are going to use to annotate our plot later.
```

---
title: "PCA Visualization - Microarray"
author: "CCDL for ALSF"
date: "`r format(Sys.time(), '%B %Y')`"
output:   
  html_notebook:
    toc: true
    toc_float: true
    number_sections: true
---

# Purpose of this analysis

> <!--WHAT DOES THIS ANALYSIS DO AND WHEN WOULD YOU USE IT?-->

Reviewer 2: I would remove this comment - folks will be able to see it when they download the Rmd file and it could be a point of confusion. https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/pull/183/files#r478728630

Author: Ahh gotcha, the instruction that references this will need to change in https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#how-to-use-the-templatermd as well.

Reviewer 2: I figured it was in the instructions because I've seen it in two pull requests, but I don't understand the rationale.

Author: Gotcha, I am sure that it was a part of another conversation somewhere so I guess that's another question for when @cansavvy. 

However, a [brief conversation](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/pull/165#discussion_r469551830) between @cansavvy and I on #165 suggests that at least part of the rationale here was: 
`That way when we review things we know where to expect added content.`

## Obtain the dataset from refine.bio

For general information about downloading data for these examples, see our ['Getting Started' section](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/01-getting-started/getting-started.html#how-to-get-the-data). 

Go to this [dataset's page on refine.bio](https://www.refine.bio/experiments/GSE37382).

Click the "Download Now" button on the right side of this screen.  

<img src="https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/raw/e140face75daa6d2c34e30a4755c362e6039a677/template/screenshots/download-now.png" width=200>  

Fill out the pop up window with your email and our Terms and Conditions:  

<img src="https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/raw/e140face75daa6d2c34e30a4755c362e6039a677/template/screenshots/download-email.png" width=500>  

It may take a few minutes for the dataset to process.
You will get an email when it is ready.

## About the dataset we are using for this example

For this example analysis, we will use this [medulloblastoma dataset](https://www.refine.bio/experiments/GSE37382).

> <!--BRIEFLY SUMMARIZE THIS DATASET--> 

Reviewer 2: Remove this comment, too.

# Using a different refine.bio dataset with this analysis?

If you'd like to adapt an example analysis to use a different dataset from [refine.bio](https://www.refine.bio/), we recommend placing the files in the `data/` directory you created and changing the filenames and paths in the notebook to match these files (we've put comments to signify where you would need to change the code).
We suggest saving plots and results to `plots/` and `results/` directories, respectively, as these are automatically created by the notebook.
From here you can customize this analysis example to fit your own scientific questions and preferences. 

***

# PCA Visualization - Microarray

## Install libraries

See our Getting Started page with [instructions for package installation](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/01-getting-started/getting-started.html#what-you-need-to-install) for a list of the other software you will need, as well as more tips and resources.

Attach the packages we need for this analysis:

```{r}
# Attach the library
library(ggplot2)

# We will need this so we can use the pipe: %>%
library(magrittr)

# Set the seed so our results are reproducible:

> set.seed(12345)

Reviewer 2: Should not be required here

```

## Import and set up data

Data downloaded from refine.bio include a metadata tab separated values (TSV) file and a data TSV file. 
This chunk of code will read the both TSV files and add them as data frames to your environment.

```{r}
# Read in metadata TSV file
metadata <- readr::read_tsv(file.path(
  data_dir, # Replace with path to your metadata file
  "metadata_GSE37382.tsv" # Replace with the name of your metadata file
))

# Read in data TSV file
df <- readr::read_tsv(file.path(
  data_dir, # Replace with path to your data file
  "GSE37382.tsv" # Replace with the name of your data file
)) %>%
  # Tuck away the Gene id column as rownames
  tibble::column_to_rownames("Gene")
```

Let's ensure that the metadata and data are in the same sample order. 

```{r}
# Make the data in the order of the metadata
df <- df %>%
  dplyr::select(metadata$geo_accession)

# Check if this is in the same order
all.equal(colnames(df), metadata$geo_accession)
```

> <!--ALL THE ANALYSIS STEPS HERE -->

Reviewer 2: Remove this comment.

Now we are going to use a combination of functions from base R and the `ggplot2` package to perform and visualize the results of the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) dimension reduction technique on our medulloblastoma samples.

## Perform Principal Components Analysis

In this code chunk, we are going to perform Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on our data and create a data frame using the PCA scores and the variables from our metadata that we are going to use to annotate our plot later.
We are using the base R [`prcomp()`](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/stats/versions/3.6.2/topics/prcomp) function to perform Principal Component Analysis (PCA) here [@prcomp-function].

```{r}
# Perform Principal Component Analysis (PCA)

> pca <- prcomp(t(df)) # We have to transpose our data frame to meet the `prcomp()` function requirements

Reviewer 2: I would probably set `scale = TRUE` here

# Make into data frame for plotting PC1 and PC2 with `ggplot2`
pca_df <- data.frame(pca$x[, 1:2]) %>%
  # Turn samples_ids stored as rownames into column
  tibble::rownames_to_column("refinebio_accession_code") %>%
  # Bring only the variables that we want from the metadata into this data frame -- here we are going to join by `refinebio_accession_code` values
  dplyr::inner_join(dplyr::select(
    metadata, refinebio_accession_code,
    histology, subgroup
  ),
  by = "refinebio_accession_code"
  )
```

> Let's plot the PC scores for the first two principal components.

Reviewer 2: I might add some steps in here that include variance explained on the plot. You might find this portion of training material to be helpful in making those changes: https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/blob/3dbc6f3f53c680ec6aa2f513851c1cd4635cc31c/machine-learning/02-openpbta_consensus_clustering.Rmd#L310

```{r}
# Make a scatterplot using `ggplot2` functionality
pca_plot <- ggplot(
  pca_df,
  aes(
    x = PC1,
    y = PC2
  )
) +
  geom_point() + # This tells R that we want a scatterplot
  theme_classic() # This tells R to return a classic-looking plot with no gridlines

# Print out plot here
pca_plot
```

> Now, let's label the data points based on their genotype subgroup since this is central to the subgroup specific based hypothesis in the [original paper](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3683624/#SD1) [@Northcott2012].

Reviewer 2: More general question - are we including hyperlinks _and_ citations?

Author: We have been doing so thus far, and this is what I gather from the [Citing sources in text section of `CONTRIBUTING.md`](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#citing-sources-in-text).
The `template.Rmd` file also instructs to use this format for the further resources section so for consistency purposes, I have been including the hyperlinks and citations.
Do you think this format should be adapted?

Reviewer 2: That is not necessarily my read of that section of contributing for what we would do outside of the further resources section. I don't have strong feelings, but it does seem like maintaining two things (link to the paper and the citation) could be kind of a pain. Question for @cansavvy when she gets back.

Reviewer: About the section in `Citing sources` in CONTRIBUTING.md. Here's what I'm assuming might have been the statement in question: 

> Note that citations do not have links, so links to helpful docs and vignettes need to be added separately.

I didn't intend for it to mean that everything that is cited must also have a link to something, but more that IF there is something helpful we want to point out, to know that the citations themselves don't have links, so adding a citation won't add a link. If this statement was more confusing than helpful, we can definitely reframe or remove it. 

I would also say that if something is in the `Further resources` section, in _most_ instances I don't think we need to link to it again in another place in the notebook. (I say most, because I could see instances where may there's a particular section of something that addresses a particular topic).

```{r}
# Make a scatterplot with ggplot2
pca_plot <- ggplot(
  pca_df,
  aes(
    x = PC1,
    y = PC2,
    color = subgroup # This will label points with different colors for each `subgroup`
  )
) +
  geom_point() +
  theme_classic()

# Print out plot here

> pca_plot

Reviewer 2: I might skip immediately to coloring by subgroup here, particularly if you will be adding the variance explained steps.

For general information about downloading data for these examples, see our ['Getting Started' section](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/01-getting-started/getting-started.html#how-to-get-the-data). 

Go to this [dataset's page on refine.bio](https://www.refine.bio/experiments/GSE37382).

Click the "Download Now" button on the right side of this screen.  

<img src="https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/raw/e140face75daa6d2c34e30a4755c362e6039a677/template/screenshots/download-now.png" width=200>  

Fill out the pop up window with your email and our Terms and Conditions:  

<img src="https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/raw/e140face75daa6d2c34e30a4755c362e6039a677/template/screenshots/download-email.png" width=500>  

It may take a few minutes for the dataset to process.
You will get an email when it is ready.

## About the dataset we are using for this example

For this example analysis, we will use this [medulloblastoma dataset](https://www.refine.bio/experiments/GSE37382).

The data that we downloaded from refine.bio for this analysis has 285 microarray samples obtained from patients with medulloblastoma.

> The purpose of the experiment is to identify the predominant regions with somatic copy number aberrations in each medulloblastoma subgroup.

Reviewer: Probably should add one more sentence here previewing what subgroups and histology information is included since we will be using that in the plot we make.

metadata <- readr::read_tsv(file.path(
  data_dir, # Replace with path to your metadata file
  "metadata_GSE37382.tsv" # Replace with the name of your metadata file
))

# Read in data TSV file
df <- readr::read_tsv(file.path(
  data_dir, # Replace with path to your data file
  "GSE37382.tsv" # Replace with the name of your data file
)) %>%
  # Tuck away the Gene id column as rownames
  tibble::column_to_rownames("Gene")
```

Let's ensure that the metadata and data are in the same sample order. 

```{r}
# Make the data in the order of the metadata
df <- df %>%
  dplyr::select(metadata$geo_accession)

# Check if this is in the same order
all.equal(colnames(df), metadata$geo_accession)
```

Now we are going to use a combination of functions from base R and the `ggplot2` package to perform and visualize the results of the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) dimension reduction technique on our medulloblastoma samples.

## Perform Principal Components Analysis

In this code chunk, we are going to perform Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on our data and create a data frame using the PCA scores and the variables from our metadata that we are going to use to annotate our plot later.

> We are using the base R `prcomp()` function to perform Principal Component Analysis (PCA) here [@prcomp-function].

Reviewer: We probably don't need a citation for this function? But I suppose it doesn't hurt anything? But also maybe we should just get rid of it so we don't feel like we need to do this every time.

```{r}
# Perform Principal Component Analysis (PCA) using the `prcomp()` function
pca <- prcomp(
  t(df), # We have to transpose our data frame to meet the `prcomp()` function requirements

>   scale = TRUE # This tells R that we want the variables scaled to have unit variance

Reviewer: Was there a particular reason you went with scaled here? I'm inclined to not used scaled since this data is already normalized and should be all on the same scale already. In other words, we shouldn't need `scale = TRUE` because it's normalized, and if the data still looks like it needs scaling, then I think that might indicate other problems with the dataset aka scaling a wonky dataset could hide a red flag. 

There might be a situation to use `scale = TRUE` ? but I'd be inclined to encourage our users to always do `scale = FALSE` first before making that decision.

Author: This decision was made based on @jaclyn-taroni's review suggestion [here](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/pull/198#discussion_r479373038), but you do bring up a good point and agree that we shouldn't need it here with the normalized data.

Reviewer 2: Quantile normalization is going to make it such that the samples have the same underlying distributions. The genes won't necessarily end up on the same scale. You could make an argument that it should be "close enough."

)
```

Let's take a preview at the PCA results.

```{r}
# We can access the results from our `pca` object using `$x`
head(pca$x)
```

We can see that we now have 285 principal component values for each of our samples.

## Explore Variance in PCA Results

The principal components are automatically ordered by the variance they explain, meaning PC1 would always be the principal component that explains the most variance in your dataset.

> Before visualizing and interpreting the results, it can be useful to understand the proportion of variance explained by each principal component.

Reviewer: I would put this sentence first and the one in 218 second.

> For example, if PC1 explained 96% of the variance in your data and very clearly showed a difference between sample batches you would be very concerned about your dataset!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the largest variance component, PC1, explained 96% of the variance in your data and very clearly showed a difference between sample batches you would be very concerned about your dataset!
```

```{r}
# Make a scatterplot using `ggplot2` functionality
pca_plot <- ggplot(
  pca_df,
  aes(
    x = PC1,
    y = PC2,
    color = subgroup # This will label points with different colors for each `subgroup`
  )
) +
  geom_point() + # This tells R that we want a scatterplot
  theme_classic() # This tells R to return a classic-looking plot with no gridlines

# Print out plot here
pca_plot
```

Looks like Group 4 and SHH groups somewhat cluster with each other but Group 3 seems to be less distinct as there are some samples clustering with Group 4 as well.

We can add another label to our plot to get more information about our dataset.
Let's also label the data points based on the histological subtype that each sample belongs to.

```{r}
# Make a scatterplot with ggplot2
pca_plot <- ggplot(
  pca_df,
  aes(
    x = PC1,
    y = PC2,
    color = subgroup, # This will label points with different colors for each `subgroup`
    shape = histology # This will label points with different colors for each `histology` group
  )
) +
  geom_point() +
  theme_classic()

# Print out plot here
pca_plot
```

> Adding the histological subtype label to our plot made our plot more informative, but was not helpful in distinguishing a better cluster behavior for Group 3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding the histological subtype label to our plot made our plot more informative, but the diffuse Group 3 data doesn't appear to be related to a histology subtype.
```
`Better cluster behavior` sounds like the data should or shouldn't be a certain way, and we don't necessarily know that, this is just an exploratory analysis. It can sometimes tell us things, but often data are just being data.

> One may continue to add annotation labels to get a further understanding of the cluster behavior of each subgroup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We could test out other variables as annotation labels to get a further understanding of the cluster behavior of each subgroup.
```

## Save annotated PCA plot as a PNG

Now that we have an annotated PCA plot, let's save it!

You can easily switch this to save to a JPEG or TIFF by changing the file name within the `ggsave()` function to the respective file suffix.

```{r}
# Save plot using `ggsave()` function
ggsave(file.path(
  plots_dir,
  "GSE37382_pca_scatterplot.png"

> ), # Replace with name relevant your plotted data

Reviewer: Can we move this comment to be in line with the line above?

Author: Oops, that change didn't save. Will make sure this is fixed in the next commit 👍

df <- readr::read_tsv(file.path(
  data_dir, # Replace with path to your data file
  "GSE37382.tsv" # Replace with the name of your data file
)) %>%
  # Tuck away the Gene id column as rownames
  tibble::column_to_rownames("Gene")
```

Let's ensure that the metadata and data are in the same sample order. 

```{r}
# Make the data in the order of the metadata
df <- df %>%
  dplyr::select(metadata$geo_accession)

# Check if this is in the same order
all.equal(colnames(df), metadata$geo_accession)
```

Now we are going to use a combination of functions from base R and the `ggplot2` package to perform and visualize the results of the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) dimension reduction technique on our medulloblastoma samples.

## Perform Principal Components Analysis

In this code chunk, we are going to perform Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on our data and create a data frame using the PCA scores and the variables from our metadata that we are going to use to annotate our plot later.
We are using the base R `prcomp()` function to perform Principal Component Analysis (PCA) here.

```{r}
# Perform Principal Component Analysis (PCA) using the `prcomp()` function
pca <- prcomp(

>   t(df), # We have to transpose our data frame to meet the `prcomp()` function requirements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  t(df), # We have to transpose our data frame so we are obtaining PCA scores for samples instead of genes
```
